This project has been a tremendous eye-opener for me. I’ve had fun and frustrations alike along the way, and it’s a refreshing experience for me because of the novelty and practicality of the idea.

It struck me hard this year that the idea of any project pretty much hinges all the future work. Fortunately, for our group, it hinged us upwards. The nature of eye-tracking is impressive in itself, and coupled with research, the idea already stands out. But that said, the idea brought along a new set of difficulties, be it the communication issues, hardware issues, or researching difficulties. I felt good doing this project because it is very ambitious, and yet felt as if we had a safety net given that we were working with Defence Science Organisation (DSO). 

Speaking of which, this was the first major collaboration I have ever had with external organisations and mentors. Working with a third party and having to meet the expectations of both DSO and the school felt like a daunting task at first. We felt the need to be ahead of schedule due to this commitment to DSO, and it might not have seemed like it at first, but good time-management was crucial. 

Commitments to DSO were heavy at first with the frequent meetings that were needed to straighten out the plans. Each meeting was full of content and tiring at times. In retrospect, while the meeting and planning phase was definitely not the most fulfilling, it was the most important. We had many ideas and many conflicts, many important dates to keep in mind, and many uncertainties.

Having planned a research experiment with the help of DSO really firmed up my idea of what a plan should be like, and how an experiment should be carried out. Designing the website and getting it to work wasn’t a problem as we had done this last year, but this year we had the added challenge of designing an apparatus, not just a website or a game. We put much thought into the consideration of variables and other possible factors, such as frequency of appearance of game targets (random instead of stratified), background (plain instead of colourful), and such. I got a chance to conduct the actual experiment and became aware of the precautions we had to take to make the experiment fair, such as proper briefing, trial runs, and other checks along the way. Our mentors brought to our knowledge the usage of industry standard assessments such as heuristic tests and the Questionnaire for User Interaction Satisfaction (QUIS). The plan and final report also had to be rather detailed, including sections like rationale, aim, procedure, measures, findings, etcetera. It was a learning experience organising all the numbers and information into a proper report. I am very happy that working with DSO also gave me a chance to see how working in this field is like!

Presenting a research (experiment) was also fairly new to me. I was naturally tasked with a large portion of this research work as I didn’t do the programming. The obvious objective was to translate raw data such as game timings, misfire rates, QUIS scores, means and modes, to graphs and charts that clearly expressed trends and answers to the audience, and this was extremely tedious. I finally understand the hard work behind each and every neat and seemingly simple graph. 

Conveying the practicality and novelty of our project was challenging too. With a commercial eye-tracker already in hand, people were bound to wonder what our goal was and why our project was useful. The presentation was hence difficult to arrange, and we used the help of videos. But even with the most work done off stage, things can still go very wrong during the actual presentation, which was what happened. The device itself malfunctioned on the actual day and we were terribly ill-prepared for such a scenario. We had no choice but to show parts of the raw footage taken from the experiment, which gave the judges a glimpse of how the actual applications worked, albeit less effectively.

Although I didn’t do the coding, working with coders and building the applications alongside them was also a learning experience for me. I got to understand the views of coders and put things into perspective. I learned about the many possibilities we could explore, such as making a chrome extension, and also learned to judge the coding workload of different tasks, which was very helpful in the planning of what to do.

Overall, this project has been fulfilling and I enjoy the commitment that was required of it. Majority of the group had to be on task all the time, especially during project meetings as falling behind meant more problems for the rest of the group. The only time I wasn’t able to turn up for a meeting was in the early part of the year due to a test, and it felt as if I had missed out on a huge discussion which really put me behind. I had to spend quite some time catching up on what was discussed. Still, I would definitely like my future projects to be this enriching and fulfilling.